---
layout: post
title: The Art of Communication
date: '2016-02-03T03:01:59+00:00'
permalink: the-art-of-communication
---
<p>This week in my <a href="http://jadud.com/teaching/softeng-sp16/" target="_blank">Software Engineering</a> class we are reading Jono Bacon&#8217;s <em><a href="http://artofcommunityonline.org/Art_of_Community_Second_Edition.pdf" target="_blank">The Art of Community</a></em> with a particular focus on communication. Given that open source communities collaborate across both time and space, generating a culture of clear, friendly and open communication is key. Chapter 2, &#8220;Communicating Clearly&#8221;, drove home for me the idea that it is one thing to be friendly over email or IRC, it is another thing entirely to create a culture for communication that inspires people to invite contributions, help one another, and generally do their best work. Wanting to promote the best possible culture for collaboration in my team, I&#8217;ve been thinking about some times I have gotten things right (or not so right) when it comes to communication.</p>
<h2>TL;DR</h2>
<p>Two examples on the power a project convener can have in a community. Sometimes, we need those folks to help the channels of communication run smoothly. But just as often, it is the job of a community leader to consider how he or she might be contributing to a blockage in communication. In either case, it is a role not to be taken lightly.</p>
<h2>Communicating Clearly&#8230;</h2>
<p>In my current job at Berea College&#8217;s Education Studies Department, I have been developing a new web app to collect and share departmental data on our students. Our team had struggled long enough with a paid service (which we don&#8217;t need to name) that had promised to vanish all of our data woes. What we needed was a platform that would bring the process of collecting, analyzing and reporting data under one roof in an easy to use interface that anyone could learn to use. It wasn&#8217;t that this provider had made a bad product, so much as we were using a &#8220;one size fits all&#8221; package and (like every team) we have our own specific needs.</p>
<p>Wanting to make something better, I set out to develop my own Rails app to get the job done. From the word go, I had a crash course in software project management. More people than I ever would have guessed became involved. It seemed that every person I consulted named one or two <em>more</em> people that they would need to bring into the loop and also seek their input. I am incredibly lucky that I get to work with so many talented, dedicated folks at Berea &#8212; most people who choose to work at colleges are. But as anyone who has worked for a school or non-profit knows, everyone is already beset with twice as many projects as they have bandwidth for, meaning that it became my responsibility to ensure that effective communication was flowing between all stakeholders (college administration with enterprise systems, my supervisor with the CTO, users with one another). Everyone was on board with the idea, but <strong>what was needed was someone to make sure all of the details fell in place at the right time and were passed to the right people. And that&#8217;s exactly what I did.</strong> As of this writing, the web app is scheduled for its first release this Spring.</p>
<h2>&#8230;and Missing the Mark</h2>
<p>By that same token, there have been times when being good at communication means knowing when to get out of the way. In a previous job at a non-profit I was responsible for coordinating a new project. This project was completely new for the institution, and was identified as a strong need for success in our mission. As I mentioned above, anyone who has worked for a non-profit knows that almost everyone on the team has the desire to pitch in that far exceeds realistic capacity. After a few months of meetings without much getting done, it became clear to me that while there were many supporters of the project, no one had the bandwidth to take on this extra project.</p>
<p>Not having the background to take this project on solo I approached my supervisor. &#8220;Maybe its just me, but it seems like everyone has the best of intentions at heart, but not quite enough capacity to pitch in.&#8221;, I told her. &#8220;I&#8217;ve organized several meetings so far, and it seems like if people were going to get involved it would have happened by now. What am I doing wrong?&#8221; My boss, in her infinite wisdom, suggested that I find a way to bring this up to our team. It seemed that our team&#8217;s problem was an unrealistic idea of what we could realistically accomplish and that as the convener of the project it was my job to confront that possibility. <strong>In fact, as the facilitator, by not confronting our lack of capacity, I was hindering open dialogue about the issue and letting it fester.</strong> So I brought it up. We had a very healthy conversation about it, and agreed that the project, while very worthwhile, simply wasn&#8217;t possible at that time. While we decided to cancel the project, we left that final meeting revealed to have finally made a decision about something.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
